We now have our first look at the
Medieval 3 unit roster, specifically the
Holy Roman Empire that was shown off in
the Show and Tell livestream from
Creative Assembly. I have the notes
here, so let's get into it. Now, as
always, I've put together a summary of
my notes in a mirror board here, so it's
going to be covering the general
approach to unit roster design, then
here the sort of framework and
scaffolding that they're setting up for
unit rosters in Medieval 3 with a
specific look at the Holy Roman Empire
as a case study, then we look
specifically at select units from the
Holy Roman Empire roster, and then
finally there are some cleanup questions
that are relevant for Medieval 3.
All right, so from the top, we're going
to be going into the general approach.
So, the main thing that they want to do
when it comes to unit rosters is they
want to be strongly tied to the people.
Uh and that means that, you know, it's a
window to the world is their common
framing that they say. So, um basically
what this means is they want to have
each characteristic region have its own
specific troops, and they bucket this
into different groups that we'll be
seeing later that are kind of broadly
like Western European or more locally
like for France, and then more specific
to a region, and then culture. So,
really dynamic stuff that we'll be
seeing later, but that's their guiding
philosophy. They want the unit rosters
to be specifically tied to the people of
the land and your faction.
Um another thing they they said is that
they're they're trying to do some
innovation here. So, instead of certain
regions giving you specific units, and
that's it, that's the end-all be-all, it
actually now is more closely tied to the
culture of that region, and that culture
can moved to different areas. So, they
give a good example of what this might
look like. So, for instance, they say
here, let's say you're playing as Egypt,
and for instance, the Egyptian or sorry,
the Italian city-states start trading
with you, coming over through migration,
and you get Italian culture uh coming to
your area, you will now have access to
interact with that culture and unlock
units. So, this is different than what
we've seen before. Again, previously, if
you wanted to get that specific Italian
unit,
you would have to sail to Italy, to that
specific region to recruit them, versus
now it seems like because of the
culture, you can actually get them in
your own lands. Uh CA is aware that this
can cause some issues when it comes to
faction identity because, you know,
cultures will move and blend and if
everything can blend and you can get
Italians in, you know, Denmark and
Italians in Egypt, you know, what tie to
reality has
uh is there left anymore? So, they are
keenly aware that there are these
restrictions. So, they want you to be
able to have culture that flows, that
makes units somewhat interchangeable,
but there are limits to that.
Uh so, a couple key things is that um
basically, there is a mechanic for this
sort of recruitment based on culture.
So, here for instance, they say some
units will only be available if the
matching culture is present in a region
and if you're acknowledging this culture
through customs and policies. So, it's
not just anytime a culture hits your
region, you get them. No, it's
specifically you have to engage with it
and you have to do certain policies. So,
already that limits the spread of
culture and the spread of these units.
Beyond that, they're not going to put
every type of unit from say the Holy
Roman Empire into this sort of
culturally related unit.
So, good example they say is the
longbowman. So, this is tied to English
culture, yes, but they're making unique
to the English such that just because
France is their neighbor and they have a
lot of English kind of exchange through
trade and economy and whatever, it
doesn't mean that the French can all of
a sudden have the longbowman. So, there
are certain units within a units faction
roster that they're keeping off of that
cultural
um kind of interchange. And we'll go
over some of this later, it'll make more
sense. Um but yeah, so that's preserving
faction identity.
And then another guiding principle is
this sense of progression. So, they do
want to make it clear that as you go
through the ages,
uh both the formations and your talk
technology changes. And they want to
make it very distinct between the early
game, which they say is the tall
century, to the mid mid game, which is
13th-14th, and the late game with the
which is 15th. So,
uh you know, they said, you know,
alluding back to older Total War titles,
uh people love visual uh richness and
they want it to be historically
accurate. So, they're working closely
with historians and other armors and
people like that who can guide them on
what is pertinent evolution in terms of
equipment. Uh so, some of this will be a
walk through different eras and you get
differentiation in upgrades to
individual units, which they say see
below. See below, we'll look at this
now. So, equipment upgrades, they say,
uh yes, as you go through these
upgrades, they want them to be visually
present. That's one of the big things
that people liked from back in the day
Medieval II.
When you upgrade a particular unit, uh
it would have a visual impact not just
through stats, but actually as you
zoomed in, uh you could see that care
and attention and detail to the troops.
Now, I'm not exactly sure how equipment
upgrades works with respect to units
progressing through a tech tree. Um
it might be like the Medieval system
where, yes, units can evolve into kind
of different states along the tech tree,
but within a particular instantiation,
maybe you can upgrade its equipment. So,
we'll see kind of how that plays out.
They didn't really get into that level
of detail.
Uh but, now going into the unit roster,
this to me is very interesting, the way
they're framing all of this.
So, unit roster. So, they are coming up
with these unit rosters by having sort
of four different parts of the equation.
So, this is going to be the Holy Roman
Empire unit roster sort of as it stands
right now and uh I have this broken out
here. But, basically what they're doing
is they're taking the unit roster and
they're coming up with different parts
of that roster that represents different
levels of uniqueness. So, the first one,
the most general one is going to be your
cultural group.
So, part of the, you know, Holy Roman
Empire is going to be just they're part
of Western Europe. Therefore, they're
going to get a couple units that are
broadly tied to Western Europe. And CA
is saying that this cultural group that,
for instance, on the map here I've shown
might, you know,
relate to a bunch of different
countries. Um they're saying that that
will only really affect lower-tier
militia units and peasant units. So, I
like that idea. The fact that just
because everyone shares things in
common, it should be for the most
generic stuff, which is a peasant in
your land is getting armed with
rudimentary equipment. That makes sense
that they're shared by these Western
Europeans. When it comes to like
Northern Europeans and sort of
Scandinavians and Viking inspired
cultures, the way the basic peasants of
the basic troops take up arms is
probably distinct from Western Europe,
and so it makes sense to glob those all
together. So, you can see how they might
have these different major regions where
the sort of basic troop type might be
similar or shared.
Next, they then go to the the slightly
more local level, and they're calling
this the faction block. And this they
say is the regional block of a faction
um is for low now into mid-tier units
that's more specific to an area. So,
they say for instance, uh within Western
Europe, you would have France as a
particular block. And later we'll see an
example for the HRE. But yeah, so that's
where you break it down further. So,
France will have its other tier of sort
of the peasants now start to up get
upgraded, and this is where the middling
ranks of your unit roster starts to get
more specific to your faction.
And then uh even closer is going to be
your culture. So, we keep zooming in and
all the way it's down to the culture,
and this is where it's very very
specific to a particular area.
Um
the difference here with culture is that
they've now made it um
like we talked about before, tied to
cultures which can shift. So, initially,
it'll probably be like a region lock
thing. In that capacity, it'll function
very much like Rome 2 auxiliary system.
You move into a particular region, and
all of a sudden you can unlock a certain
type of auxiliary that's native to that
area. But later on, that culture can
spread and and change. So, I like that,
and they're thinking that they might
have around a half dozen cultures per
faction block. So, within France, they
might pick out, you know, Northern
France, Central France, Southern,
Western France, and each of those would
have their own specific units. And we'll
see that again when we get into the HRE.
But I like this idea of increasing
levels of granularity.
Uh and then finally they say the last
one is specific to your faction. We want
stuff that's absolutely unique to them.
And they're saying that this is going to
be the thing that gives the flavor to
different factions. So, for instance,
let's say you had the Mongols as a
faction as a faction, they would have
very specific stuff to the Mongols,
maybe the Mongol guard, maybe very
specific step archers.
Um later we'll see with the HRE they say
HRE's faction specific units are all are
all geared around having very
well-trained and very well-armored
units. So, I like this, a way to have
sort of four levels of differentiation
that are shared and somewhat overlapping
with others and that make playthroughs
very different but still keeping that
core faction identity. This is, you
know, this is different than we've seen
in previous Total War games and I think
it's quite innovative and it has a lot
of realism in the shared culture
exchange between different militaries.
All right, now let's get into how is the
HRE uh roster shaping up? So, here you
have it here. This is what they showed
on screen. So, you have the start,
early, high, and late periods. So, the
units advance over time. And then these
uh color coding, this is what uh
Creative Assembly did, but I put headers
on it. So, green is going to be your
general culture, blue is going to be
faction uh blocks, and then yellow is
going to be your specific faction, and
then red is specific culture. So, I've
added maps here just for us to kind of
make sense of it. So, all these units
here, which you could see, are all
because you are in Western Europe and
probably the French would have a similar
slice of units. This probably also makes
it easier for development where, you
know, a quarter of each unit roster can
be redundant work shared between
different factions. It's not you wholly
unique for each uh different faction
that you design. So, yeah, Western
Europe would have access to these. And
again, the idea is that it's mostly
like, you know, peasantry type folks.
Next, you have your faction blocks. So,
for the HRE, at least currently there's
two faction blocks. Basically, there is
north of the Alps, the Imperial block,
and south of the Alps, the Italian
block. That makes sense. Distinct
cultures separated by a mountain range
that can broadly kind of have different
styles. So, that's your faction block
there, and you can see there's a big
chunk of them in the middle.
And then lastly, we have the faction
specific troops. And what CA was saying
is for the HRE, this is going to be
heavy, well-equipped troops that are
expensive to train and to maintain. And
a specific example would be the Imperial
knights.
Then lastly, when you get into specific
cultures for the HRE, they mentioned
Saxon, Bohemia, Franconia, Flemish, and
the Swiss. So, I've pointed to these on
an arrow so you so you could see, yeah,
very specific areas. And of the
Franconians, the Konstabler's, which
we'll cover later, but yeah, this is an
example of, okay, each of these very
specific subcultures and a particular
unit for them. But, reminder that these
cultures can be exported and moved as
these cultures interact with the the
surrounding lands. So, yeah, all very
interesting. I I like the way this is
coming together. It gives you a lot of
flavor.
Uh another thing to show here is that
there are other stickies on this page,
which is going to be these little small
things in the top right corner. I've
gone ahead and make the icons bigger.
And essentially, this is going to be
sort of which slice of the population,
which estate are you pulling from? Is it
the peasantry? Is it the urban class? Or
is it the nobles? And I really like
this, and you can see how the thinking
overlaps with the factions. So, here, if
I'm choosing the faction of the Holy
Roman Empire, it seems to be that the
faction specific stuff is very much tied
into the nobility. So, it seems like,
you know, you are the leader of this
faction,
that means you're probably the king or
the nobles. It makes sense that if I
pick HRE, it's very specific to the
nobles,
um and then there you go, there you have
it. Um versus, you know, the peasantry,
which is more generic. You can see them
located here. It makes sense that that
would be stuff that's specific to a
local area or a general culture. So, I
like the way that they're kind of mel-
melding these estates with these
different ways of kind of slicing and
dicing your unit roster.
And then finally you see the urban class
that comes in. Again, they are going to
be something that is going to be
specific to a faction or to a culture,
but what you can also see that I think
is an interesting hit reflection of
history is that the urban class really
starts to get expanded in the high late
uh period and that is just true. Uh as
you get further along into the medieval
period uh and the Black Death comes in
and it wipes out vast swaths of, you
know, the general population,
the socioeconomics change and you have
an
uh an emergence of the urban class that
kind of takes over from the nobility and
has growing importance. So, I like to
see that reflected in the roster. That
to me is is really uh exciting.
So, yeah, that's basically it for the
unit roster in the HRE and sort of how
they're slicing and dicing them.
Uh then we get into specific units. So,
uh here we have one the Ministeriales.
They say these are non-noble knights uh
which are sort of urban townsfolk. So,
if you were to map them, they would
probably be uh somewhere in the urban
group here, probably down uh in this
area where you would be plucking them
out. And so, there's a history to these
guys. They say that they are basically
um similar to different um kind of
non-noble
elite troops that you're seeing in
others. In the in the French world, I
think they're also known as like
sergeants and you see them they are
name-dropping English yeomen, Iberian uh
villain knights. So, very similar to
different cultures, but here it's the
specific flavor uh for the HRE. So, here
you have them.
Then more specific to this kind of area
is going to be the Konstabler. And
again, we said this was a Franconian
unit. Uh and so, they are going to be
heavy missile cavalry. Uh they are tied
to the mercantile and economic
traditions of this area. So, I like that
flavor and so, it's a little bit hard to
pull out, but I think this is going to
be the where the unit is located on your
tech tree. So, it's going to be a
mid-game unique unit that gets up here
appears in roughly the 13th century.
And then lastly here we have the
Imperial Knights, so your elite noble
cavalry. And one of the cool things that
they say is Imperial Knights are good
example for units that you take through
all eras and ages and apply equipment
upgrades to. So, this again speaks to
some of the dynamics that I am curious
to learn more about, which is the idea
that yes, some of these units kind of
get unlocked at a later tier. Some of
them are at an early tier and stay
there, but some of them are like through
lines. And it seems like what I'm
reading here is the through line ones
are probably going to be the ones that
are most unique to your faction. So,
here in this case we have a column for
the Knights. I'm curious to see what the
other one is. It's probably going to be
a unique ranged unit.
So, that's probably how they're going to
be doing it for each faction. Each
faction will probably have its own
unique faction, you know, melee
infantry, cavalry, and then ranged. And
then you can take those all the way
through, and as they go through the eras
it's the same unit type, but you get to
upgrade its equipment through I don't
know, barracks or whatever. So, yeah,
all very interesting.
Looks super nuanced, a lot of research
going into this. And CA does make a nod
to that with a little
discussion of their development process,
which involves a lot of iteration, a lot
of research. They name drop historians,
YouTube channels, and all the like of
people they've worked with. And what I
thought was particularly cool is they've
actually taken a look at
past titles, not just games, you know,
how CA did it for Medieval I and
Medieval II, but also mods for all of
those games to see what have others done
when it comes to slicing and dicing
these different cultures to identify
units that they think are particular.
So, I like that. Looking history and
looking at precedents of other games and
even the work of modders to determine
what units would be relevant or might
even just be popular.
And then finally there were some
questions posed here uh to kind of wrap
up the stream and the discussion of
Medieval 3. So, one of them was, "Hey,
ladders. Is there any more work?"
Because last time we looked at this, it
was placeholder. In this case, they say,
"Yes, we do have some sort of
placeholder stuff." They're calling it
iteration zero. And essentially, it just
allows the ladder to move around. And
there was a question of, you know, why
is this taking so much time? And the
answer was, you know, getting into the
nuance. Ladders may seem simple, but
there's animations for grabbing the
ladders, moving them. Then there's
interactions with what if a unit attacks
that ladder or it's hit by arrows? Do
they drop it? How does that work? What
about pathfinding now that you're
holding onto something? It's actually
quite complex.
Uh, and then some more quick questions.
They say, you know, in this the view of
the siege, there's a lot of times where
the camera got close and you could look
through the building in what was, you
know, in other games titled debug cam.
Is that going to be a feature? And CA is
saying, "Yes, they do want you to quite
easily see within buildings." They might
tweak it a little bit, but essentially,
yes. They want to make it easy to see
inside of interiors because now that's a
big selling point for sieges is that
battles can actually take place inside
uh in a very dynamic and very
simulation-heavy way.
Uh, this is a very interesting point.
They say, "Any plan for naval battles?"
Uh, so Creative Assembly did confirm
that yes, they would really like to see
it. And it's a question of
uh
Oh, sorry. I think I got this reversed.
I think it's a question of when, but not
if. So, the the main thing is basically,
they want to lay the groundwork for the
land combat, get that solid, and then
eventually move on to naval battles. The
main thing that's holding them up is
that the engine that's being built right
now does not have precedents for naval
battles, unlike kind of land battles
where they can race recycle a lot of
stuff. It's been a while since they've
done naval battles, and so it would be a
lot of rework from from scratch.
Which is bad in a sense that it's going
to take a lot of resource time, but good
in a sense that they can build a proper
foundation and do hopefully naval
battles uh correctly.
Uh, then there was some more questions
about, you know, why is it mechanically
hard to do pathfinding correctly? So,
again, this is, you know, an age-old RTS
question and has a lot to do with just
collisions, interactions, trying to
avoid blobbing, making it
computationally efficient, things like
that. Uh, and then finally there's a
question of if they're going to do
something separate where it comes to
like sieging a city versus sieging a
castle. And CA does say that yes, they
are exploring this topic. They do
recognize that um, those are unique
scenarios. How do you attack a castle
which is very condensed and very much
about the nuances of sight lines and
murdering uh, people in pre-defined
killing zones. You know, there's a lot
of stuff, but it's very close quarters.
So, that is a
design challenge because close quarters
blobbing is not a very fun experience.
So, they're having working sessions to
see if that's possible, different
ideation on what this could look like.
How can they make it truly unique? And
to me a unique feature would be
something where yes, it's close and
confined, but there would be some system
of gaining ground in a siege and maybe
you can go into a siege, make progress,
leave the battle and not have it be a
loss, but have you gain ground or
deteriorate a wall. So, making sieges
something more progressive where year
after year you can launch different
raids or sorties to to rip aside, you
know, um, barricades or towers or things
like that. Sieges could be something
that you revisit over time.
Um, but then yeah, that's basically it
for the Medieval 3 updates. I am very
excited to see this.
For me it's very promising not just from
a gameplay perspective, but historical
realism perspective, how they're really
considering this and getting the nuances
right to have just the
Yeah, I guess the the fact that a lot of
these traits are shared between
cultures, but then there's a lot of
local flavor, but then also it can move
around, but then also you want to keep
it unique to the faction.
Uh, it just shows me that CA has been
doing a lot of thought on this and I
think that this is quite innovative the
way they're thinking of kind of breaking
out the faction rosters and the way that
you can have kind of have shared
recruitment and all that stuff. So,
really interested um but yeah, we'll
wait to see more and uh yeah, I hope you
guys enjoyed. Stay tuned for the next
one. There's more news on the way. See
you.